doc/website/blog: Generate a fully-working Go CRUD HTTP API with Ent (#1788)
ent/ent: doc/website/blog/2021-09-29-generate-a-fully-working-go-crud-http-api-with-ent.md

Having everything in the same place can be very convenient, but its true power is revealed when paired with code
generation.

If schemas are defined this way, it becomes possible to generate code for fully-working production-grade servers
automatically. If we move the responsibility for authorization decisions and custom side effects from the RPC layer to
the data layer, the implementation of the basic CRUD (Create, Read, Update and Delete) endpoints becomes generic to the
extent that it can be machine-generated. This is exactly the idea behind the popular GraphQL and gRPC Ent extensions.

Today, we would like to present a new Ent extension named `elk` that can automatically generate fully-working, RESTful
API endpoints from your Ent schemas. `elk` strives to automate all of the tedious work of setting up the basic CRUD
endpoints for every entity you add to your graph, including logging, validation of the request body, eager loading
relations and serializing, all while leaving reflection out of sight and maintaining type-safety.

Let’s get started!

### Getting Started

> The final version of the code below can be found on GitHub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final version of the code below can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/masseelch/elk-example).
```

```

3. `elk` uses a not yet released version of Ent. To have the dependencies up to date run the following:

```shell
go mod tidy
```

With these steps complete, all is set up for using our `elk`-powered ent! To learn more about Ent, how to connect to
different types of databases, run migrations or work with entities head over to
the [Setup Tutorial](https://entgo.io/docs/tutorial-setup/).

### Generating HTTP CRUD Handlers with `elk`

To generate the fully-working HTTP handlers we need first create an Ent schema definition. Open and
edit `ent/schema/pet.go`:

```go
package schema

import (
	"entgo.io/ent"
	"entgo.io/ent/schema/field"
)

// Pet holds the schema definition for the Pet entity.
type Pet struct {
	ent.Schema
}

// Fields of the Pet.
func (Pet) Fields() []ent.Field {
	return []ent.Field{
		field.String("name"),
		field.Int("age"),
	}
}

```

We added two fields to our `Pet` entity: `name` and `age`. The `ent.Schema` just defines the fields of our entity. To
generate runnable code from our schema, run:

```shell
go generate ./...
```

Observe that in addition to the files Ent would normally generate, another directory named `ent/http` was created. These

> files were generated by the `elk` extension and they contain the code for the generated HTTP handlers. For example, here

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
files were generated by the `elk` extension and contain the code for the generated HTTP handlers. For example, here
```

is some of the generated code for a read-operation on the Pet entity:

> <!--// @formatter:off-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

        render.BadRequest(w, r, "id must be an integer greater zero")
        return
    }
    // Create the query to fetch the Pet
    q := h.client.Pet.Query().Where(pet.ID(id))
    e, err := q.Only(r.Context())
    if err != nil {
        switch err.(type) {
        case ent.IdNotFound(err):
            msg := h.stripEntError(err)
            l.Info(msg, zap.Int("id", id), zap.Error(err))
            render.NotFound(w, r, msg)
        case ent.IsNotSingular(err):
            msg := h.stripEntError(err)
            l.Error(msg, zap.Int("id", id), zap.Error(err))
            render.BadRequest(w, r, msg)
        default:
            l.Error("error fetching pet from db", zap.Int("id", id), zap.Error(err))
            render.InternalServerError(w, r, nil)
        }
        return
    }
    d, err := sheriff.Marshal(&sheriff.Options{
        IncludeEmptyTag: true,
        Groups:          []string{"pet"},
    }, e)
    if err != nil {
        l.Error("serialization error", zap.Int("id", id), zap.Error(err))
        render.InternalServerError(w, r, nil)
        return
    }
    l.Info("pet rendered", zap.Int("id", id))
    render.OK(w, r, d)
}
```

> <!--// @formatter:on-->

Reviewer: ??
```suggestion
```

Next, let’s see how to create an actual RESTful HTTP server that can manage your Pet entities. Create a file
named `main.go` and add the following content:

```go
package main

import (

> 	"context"
> 	"elk-example/ent"
> 	elk "elk-example/ent/http"
> 	"fmt"
> 	"log"
> 	"net/http"
> 
> 	"github.com/go-chi/chi/v5"
> 	"github.com/go-playground/validator/v10"
> 	_ "github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3"
> 	"go.uber.org/zap"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	"context"
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"net/http"
	
	"elk-example/ent"
	elk "elk-example/ent/http"

	"github.com/go-chi/chi/v5"
	"github.com/go-playground/validator/v10"
	_ "github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3"
	"go.uber.org/zap"
```

		elk.NewPetHandler(c, l, v).Mount(r, elk.PetRoutes)
	})
	// Start listen to incoming requests.
	fmt.Println("Server running")
	defer fmt.Println("Server stopped")
	if err := http.ListenAndServe(":8080", r); err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
}

```

Next, start the server:

```shell
go run -mod=mod main.go
```

Congratulations! We now have a running server serving the Pets API. We could ask the server for a list of all pets in
the database, but there are none yet. Let’s create one first:

```shell
curl -X 'POST' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"name":"Kuro","age":3}' 'localhost:8080/pets'
```

You should get this response:

```json
{
  "age": 3,
  "id": 1,
  "name": "Kuro"
}
```

If you head over to the terminal where the server is running you can also see `elk`s built in logging:

```json
{
  "level": "info",
  "msg": "pet rendered",
  "handler": "PetHandler",
  "method": "Create",
  "id": 1
}
```

`elk` uses [zap](https://github.com/uber-go/zap) for logging. To learn more about it, have a look at its documentation.

### Relations

To illustrate more of `elk`s features, let’s extend our graph. Edit `ent/schema/user.go` and `ent/schema/pet.go`:

> `ent/schema/pet.go`:
> 
> <!--// @formatter:off-->
> ```go
> // Edges of the Pet.

Reviewer: Why the `<!--// @formatter:off-->` comment is needed?

```suggestion
```go title="ent/schema/pet.go"
// Edges of the Pet.
```

func (Pet) Edges() []ent.Edge {
    return []ent.Edge{
        edge.From("owner", User.Type).
            Ref("pets").
            Unique(),
    }
}

```

> <!--// @formatter:on-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> `ent/schema/user.go`:
> 
> ```go

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```go title="ent/schema/user.go"
```

package schema

import (
	"entgo.io/ent"
	"entgo.io/ent/schema/edge"
	"entgo.io/ent/schema/field"
)

// User holds the schema definition for the User entity.
type User struct {
	ent.Schema
}

// Fields of the User.
func (User) Fields() []ent.Field {
	return []ent.Field{
		field.String("name"),
		field.Int("age"),
	}
}

// Edges of the User.
func (User) Edges() []ent.Edge {
	return []ent.Edge{
		edge.To("pets", Pet.Type),
	}
}

```

We have now created a One-To-Many relation between the Pet and User schemas: A pet belongs to a user, and a user can
have multiple pets.

Rerun the code generator:

```shell
go generate ./...
```

Do not forget to register the `UserHandler` on our router. Just add the following lines to `main.go`:

> <!--// @formatter:off-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```diff
[...]
    r.Route("/pets", func(r chi.Router) {
        elk.NewPetHandler(c, l, v).Mount(r, elk.PetRoutes)
    })
+    // Create the user handler.
+    r.Route("/users", func(r chi.Router) {
+        elk.NewUserHandler(c, l, v).Mount(r, elk.UserRoutes)
+    })
    // Start listen to incoming requests.
    fmt.Println("Server running")
[...]
```

> <!--// @formatter:on-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

After restarting the server we can create a `User` that owns the previously created Pet named Kuro:

```shell
curl -X 'POST' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"name":"Elk","age":30,"owner":1}' 'localhost:8080/users'
```

The server returns the following response:

```json
{
  "age": 30,
  "edges": {},
  "id": 1,
  "name": "Elk"
}
```

From the output we can see that the user has been created, but the edges are empty. `elk` does not include edges in its

> output by default. You can configure `elk` to render edges using a feature called “serialization groups”. Annotate your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
output by default. You can configure `elk` to render edges using a feature called "serialization groups". Annotate your
```

schemas with the `elk.SchemaAnnotation`
and `elk.Annotation` structs. Edit `ent/schema/user.go` and add those:

> <!--// @formatter:off-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```go
// Edges of the User.
func (User) Edges() []ent.Edge {
    return []ent.Edge{
        edge.To("pets", Pet.Type).
            Annotations(elk.Groups("user")),
    }
}

// Annotations of the User.
func (User) Annotations() []schema.Annotation {
    return []schema.Annotation{elk.ReadGroups("user")}
}

```

> <!--// @formatter:on-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

are excluded, unless configured otherwise.

Next, let’s regenerate the code once again, and restart the server. You should now see the pets of a user rendered if
you read a resource:

```shell
curl 'localhost:8080/users/1'
```

```json
{
  "age": 30,
  "edges": {
    "pets": [
      {
        "id": 1,
        "name": "Kuro",
        "age": 3,
        "edges": {}
      }
    ]
  },
  "id": 1,
  "name": "Elk"
}
```

### Request validation

Our current schemas allow to set a negative age for pets or users and we can create pets without an owner (as we did
with Kuro). Ent has built-in support for basic [validation](https://entgo.io/docs/schema-fields#validators). In some
cases you may want to validate requests made against your API before passing their payload to Ent. `elk`
uses [this](https://github.com/go-playground/validator) package to define validation rules and validate data. We can
create separate validation rules for Create and Update operations using `elk.Annotation`. In our example, let’s assume
that we want our Pet schema to only allow ages greater than zero and to disallow creating a pet without an owner.
Edit `ent/schema/pet.go`:

> <!--// @formatter:off-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```go
// Fields of the Pet.
func (Pet) Fields() []ent.Field {
    return []ent.Field{
        field.String("name"),
        field.Int("age").
            Positive().

>             Annotations(elk.CreateValidation("required,gt=0"),elk.UpdateValidation("gt=0")),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            Annotations(
                elk.CreateValidation("required,gt=0"),
                elk.UpdateValidation("gt=0"),
            ),
```

    }
}

// Edges of the Pet.
func (Pet) Edges() []ent.Edge {
    return []ent.Edge{
        edge.From("owner", User.Type).
            Ref("pets").
            Unique().
            Required().
            Annotations(elk.Validation("required")),
    }
}
```

> <!--// @formatter:on-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```shell
curl -X 'POST' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"name":"Bob","age":-2}' 'localhost:8080/pets'
```

`elk` returns a detailed response that includes information about which validations failed:

```json
{
  "code": 400,
  "status": "Bad Request",
  "errors": {
    "Age": "This value failed validation on 'gt:0'.",
    "Owner": "This value is required."
  }
}
```

Note the uppercase field names. The validator package uses the structs field name to generate its validation errors, but
you can simply override this, as stated in
the [example](https://github.com/go-playground/validator/blob/9a5bce32538f319bf69aebb3aca90d394bc6d0cb/_examples/struct-level/main.go#L37)
.

If you do not define any validation rules, `elk` will not include the validation-code in its generated output. `elk`s`
request validation is especially useful if you'd wanted to do cross-field-validation.

### Upcoming Features

We hope you agree that `elk` has some useful features already, but there are still many exciting things to come. The
next version of `elk` will include::

- Fully working flutter frontend to administrate your nodes
- Integration of Ent’s validation in the current request validator

> - More transport formats (currently only json)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- More transport formats (currently only JSON)
```

### Conclusion

This post has shown just a small part of what `elk` can do. To see some more examples of what you can do with it, head
over to the project’s README on GitHub. I hope that with `elk`-powered Ent, you and your fellow developers can automate
some repetitive tasks that go into building RESTful APIs and focus on more meaningful work.

`elk` is in an early stage of development, we welcome any suggestion or feedback and if you are willing to help we'd be
very glad. The [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/masseelch/elk/issues) is a wonderful place for you to reach out for
help, feedback, suggestions and contribution.

> ### About the Developer
> 
> MasseElch is a software engineer in the windy, flat north of Germany. When not hiking with his dog Kuro (who has his own
> instagram channel :scream:) or playing hide-and-seek with his son, he drinks coffee and codes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### About the Author

_MasseElch is a software engineer from the windy, flat north of Germany. When not hiking with his dog Kuro (who has his own Instagram channel :scream:) or playing hide-and-seek with his son, he drinks coffee and enjoys coding._
```
